---
date: '2016-06-23 11:21:48'
layout: post
slug: age-of-em
published: true
title: Age of Em
categories:
- Age of Em
- Book Review
---

I recently read [Robin Hanson](http://mason.gmu.edu/~rhanson/)'s book, [*Age of Em: Work, Love and Life when Robots Rule the Earth*](http://ageofem.com/). I found it fascinating. Almost two months later, the ideas in this book still pop into my mind daily. No other book I've read in the past year has done that.


## The Author

Robin Hanson posesses a rare combination of intelligence, expertise, creativity, and niceness. And he makes excellent use of these abilities. He looks at the big picture– the *really* big picture. For example: when examining [the growth of humanity over millions of years](http://www.overcomingbias.com/2009/05/the-growth-groove-game.html), the invention of writing is a rounding error.

*Age of Em* is Hanson's attempt to describe the next era of humanity.


## The Idea

Hanson is pessimistic about the arrival of de-novo AI. Instead, he thinks it is more likely that [brain emulations](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mind_uploading) will come first. (The "em" in *Age of Em* is short for "emulation".) Creating such ems requires three key technologies, none of which exist today:

1. Fast, cheap computers.
2. High-resolution scans of one or more existing human brains.
3. Accurate models of all relevant cell types in the brain.

Hanson doesn't give any concrete timeline for when these technologies will exist. He only says "some time in the next century". 


## The Text

> I expect my analysis to be relevant for a large cloud of different but similar scenarios. In particular, conditional on my key assumptions, I expect at least 30% of future situations to be usefully informed by my analysis. Unconditionally, I expect at least 10%.



## My Observations

Way more books like this need to be written. Too much futurism is pure fantasy

I don't know enough social science to tell whether Hanson is using these theories correctly.

Writing is dry. Not a bad as an academic paper, but not particularly completing. This could be taken on a positive light. It means the book stands up on the basis of its ideas alone, not just fancy writing

If leader copies are cheap, could you do a groundhog day attack on a leader? Might need mitigation 

Section on lone developers is fascinating. 

> In sum, even though many critics have reasonable points, I still think the analysis in this book was worth the effort.

> In addition, many of your ancestors would be tempted to disown you, if they were told many things about you. While they’d be pleased and impressed by many of your features, other things about you might horrify them.




How do holidays work?


Lends itself well to being an eBook
Lots of references and links to other chapters

Did Robin Hanson write this knowing about peak end effect?

Doesn't talk about gene boosting. Of that happens before ems then only gene boosted humans will become ems 


## My Criticisms

When it comes to *Age of Em*'s core ideas, I can't find any major flaws. To dispute them requires either rejecting Hanson's core assumptions or rejecting standard economics.

There are some details that I think aren't as strong as Hanson 

My only real issue is with the writing style. Most of the book is very matter-of-fact. Once might even say the language is dry. The last chapter uses more emotionally stirring language. I'm not sure if that was intentional. If so, it's a good use of the [peak-end effect](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Peak%E2%80%93end_rule).

space travel not likely
alternate possibility:
before em growth rates take off (say computation is last puzzle to be solved and ems only run close to human speed), probes are sent to mars.


### My Criticisms of Others' Criticisms

Lots of detractors say "what if you can change ems?" but I'm most cases, these don't affect the outcome much



## Conclusion

> Seen up close and honestly, I expect the future usually to look like most places: mundane, uninspiring, and morally ambiguous, with grand hopes and justifications often masking lives of quiet desperation. Of course, lives of quiet desperation can still be worth living.

Em world doesn't sound so bad when you examine it closely. They will be smarter and harder working than almost anyone today. They'll be happy and healthy and live long fulfilling lives.

Most importantly they'll be much better at solving AI risk. This book convinced me that the best path to reducing existential risk is to create ems.

As positive as my review is, I can't recommend *Age of Em* to everyone. It will only interest a small segment of people. 
