---
date: '2017-07-04 22:26:25'
layout: post
slug: thinkpad-x62
published: true
title: 'Thinkpad X62'
categories:
  - Computers
  - Laptops
---

Back in January, I [used an old Thinkpad]({% post_url 2017-01-23-oldest-viable-laptop %}) while my [12" Macbook]({% post_url 2015-04-19-2015-macbook-review %}) was being repaired. I found myself really enjoying some aspects of it.

Some features were "nice to have", but not particularly compelling: I liked the form factor, though it was a bit thick. The removable battery came in handy a few times. I enjoyed little details like the latching lid and small bezels.

Some aspects were embarassingly poor. The screen resolution was only 1024×768, and not [IPS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IPS_panel). The VGA-out restricted possibilities for external displays. Performance and battery life were… less than ideal. Even a maxxed-out machine (1.8GHz Core 2 Duo, 8GB of RAM, SATAII SSD) was a little sluggish for work. middleton bios to get sata2

A couple of features were things I didn't know I was missing. The keyboard was amazing. It's a scandal that laptop keyboards have gotten *worse*.

Another thing I didn't know I missed was the screen; specifically, the aspect ratio. The 4:3 aspect ratio was perfect. The screen was dim, but I fixed that with an [LED backlight conversion kit](https://people.xiph.org/~xiphmont/thinkpad/led-backlight.shtml).

Still, I ended up using it more than my 12" MacBook. The X61 convinced me that a much better laptop could exist. The same chassis with modern components would be a very compelling product.


### The X62

In the quest for something better, I stumbled upon the X62. This "model" (really more of an upgrade) isn't made by Lenovo. It's the product of [51nb](https://www.facebook.com/lcdfans/), a group of enthusiasts in Shenzhen. The X62 is an X61 chassis but with:

- A 12" 1400×1050 IPS LCD (likely salvaged from an X60 tablet).
- An Intel [Core i7-5600U](https://ark.intel.com/products/85215/Intel-Core-i7-5600U-Processor-4M-Cache-up-to-3_20-GHz) (Broadwell. Dual core. Turbo boost up to 3.2GHz.)
- Up to 32GB of RAM.
- Mini DisplayPort & mini-HDMI out.
- 802.11ac, Bluetooth 4, USB 3, SD card reader, gigabit ethernet

I ordered one back in March and received it in June.


### Linux

Ubuntu 17.04 worked out of the box, but there was one annoyance: battery life. For some reason, the laptop was using 14 watts at idle. Thanks to some forum posts, I managed to tweak various kernel module options and got idle down to 5 watts. This drastically improved battery life. The specific tweaks were:

{% highlight bash %}
#!/bin/sh

# Disable the NMI watchdog
echo '0' > '/proc/sys/kernel/nmi_watchdog';

# Runtime power management for I2C devices
for i in /sys/bus/i2c/devices/*/device/power/control ; do
  echo auto > ${i}
done

# Runtime power-management for PCI devices
for i in /sys/bus/pci/devices/*/power/control ; do
  echo auto > ${i}
done

# Runtime power-management for USB devices
for i in /sys/bus/usb/devices/*/power/control ; do
  echo auto > ${i}
done

# Low power SATA
for i in /sys/class/scsi_host/*/link_power_management_policy ; do
  echo min_power > ${i}
done

# Disable Wake-on-LAN on ethernet port
ethtool -s wlan0 wol d;
ethtool -s eth0 wol d

#Enable Audio codec power management
echo '1' > '/sys/module/snd_hda_intel/parameters/power_save';

# Low power wireless
iw dev wlan0 set power_save on
{% endhighlight %}

I also had to use Realtek's driver for the ethernet controller, as the default one wasted power. A `sudo apt install r8168-dkms` and a module blacklist later, I was in business. With these tweaks, the X62 idles in power state PC6. It's possible to go lower, but I'm content with the current battery life.

I wish Linux had better defaults, but this sort of thing is to be expected when it comes to open source software. Still, after these tweaks, the X62 has become a joy to use.


### Backlight Replacement



## Conclusion

The X62 is a niche product, but for me it's the best option out there. My MacBook has become my secondary laptop. I've only taken it out of the house once since I got the X62, and that was for my Oregon bikepacking trip.
